Welcome to what I believe to be YouTube's only complete and totally free private pilot ground course.
Throughout this series, I will teach you everything you need to know in order to earn your wings as a pilot.
What's up guys? I'm Josh and this is my father-in-law Mike.
And this is lesson one on my totally free private pilot ground course.
Today we're going to be talking about the four forces that act on an airplane while it's in flight.
This is a super important lesson because if you have a basic understanding of aerodynamics,
this is going to give you a good foundation that you can start building on throughout your training.
Plus, these questions might be on the written test.
Oh, I didn't mention that there's a written test?
Oh yeah, there's a written test and you've got to pass it with at least a 70%.
But don't worry, I got you.
Anyway, let's take a look at these four forces that affect our airplane in flight.
As you can see, these forces are lift, weight, thrust and drag.
Now the first force you should know about is lift.
As you can see, this is the upward force that actually picks the aircraft up away from the ground.
And this is caused by basically two things, relative wind and the wing design.
Now we pilots have a super fancy name for this wing design.
We call it an airfoil.
But I don't want to go into too much detail on that right now because we're going to be talking about that in more detail in the next lesson.
The next force we need to consider when flying an aircraft is weight.
Now weight is simply the combined load of all the people on board the aircraft, all the fuel, any baggage or cargo you might have,
and even the aircraft itself.
It includes everything on board the aircraft.
The other thing you should know about the weight is that it opposes lift and acts downward through the center of gravity.
Now, we'll discuss the center of gravity more in an upcoming episode.
But the center of gravity is basically where the average weight of the aircraft and everything on board is centered.
If you could hang an airplane from a string and you were to place the center of gravity directly beneath the string, the aircraft would balance perfectly.
Now, here's something that may not make a lot of sense yet, but it's important to know.
In steady, unaccelerated flight, lift and weight are both equal.
But we'll come back to that here in just a second.
Next, we have thrust, and this is the force that propels our aircraft forward.
Thrust is typically created by some kind of engine and propeller working together, or a rotor for you helicopter nerds out there.
Now, the important thing to know about thrust is that in order to move the aircraft forward, you must first overcome drag, which we depict here as a rearward force.
But really, this force just opposes forward movement, and that drag makes it difficult to move the aircraft forward.
And there are two types of drag that you should be concerned about as a pilot.
Parasite drag and induced drag.
What happens when you stick your hand out of the window of a moving vehicle?
The wind pulls your hand back, doesn't it?
The faster you drive, the more your hand gets pulled back.
This is what we call parasite drag, and just like it does when you stick your hand out of a moving vehicle, parasite drag increases as airspeed increases.
As you can see from this chart, it increases exponentially with faster air speeds.
That's one of the reasons why we can't fly super fast in our training aircraft.
There's way too much parasite drag holding the airplane back at high airspeed.
Now, there are actually three different types of parasite drag, and the first one is form drag.
In a nutshell, form drag is wind that goes around the shape of the aircraft.
How much form drag do you think an aircraft of this shape would produce?
Probably a lot, right?
It's not a smooth round shape that can allow air to smoothly flow around it.
Another type of parasite drag is interference drag.
This one might be a little bit harder to understand, but this type of drag occurs when different streams of air flow create little pockets of turbulence at different places on the aircraft,
and this restricts the smooth air flow around the surface of the aircraft.
Next, we have skin friction drag.
This type of parasite drag is dragged that's caused by the surface of the aircraft.
If we were able to zoom in with a microscope and look at the skin of the aircraft, what you find is that it's actually not as smooth as it looks.
Wind can still act on these little microscopically rough areas and reduce the speed of our aircraft.
As you might have noticed, we typically paint or polish the exterior surfaces of an aircraft to reduce skin friction drag, but it's never completely eliminated.
Induced drag is the other type of drag that affects our aircraft.
It's created as a direct result of lift.
I'm going to explain this more in the next episode, but our wings direct the relative wind above and below the surface of the wing,
and this creates lift, but it also creates induced drag.
Now, induced drag is kind of weird.
As airspeed increases, the wing gets more efficient, and because of that, induced drag actually decreases.
Here's what's interesting.
If we were to look at these two types of drag on a chart, what you find is that parasite drag increases exponentially with airspeed,
but induced drag decreases exponentially with airspeed.
Because of that, there's a magical little airspeed range on every aircraft where we can achieve the least amount of drag possible when we're out flying around,
and a lot of airspeed you're going to be flying are directly related to this airspeed.
Pilots often refer to this as the lift to drag ratio, or LD max.
You might be wondering why it's called the lift to drag ratio and not the thrust to drag ratio.
Well, just like lift and weight, in steady unaccelerated flight, thrust and drag are both equal.
But all these forces are directly related to each other.
You're probably wondering why the heck we're learning about aerodynamics today.
You just want to get into the plane and start flying.
But if you understand this concept, it's going to help you understand how to control the aircraft.
Any time I make an adjustment to any one of these forces, it's going to cause a change in one of the other forces.
Now, we said that during steady unaccelerated flight, lift and weight are both equal.
Now that I've got my airplane trimmed down for level flight, let's see what happens when I increase my airspeed by increasing my thrust.
Alright, so I've got the airplane all trimmed out. I'm at 1600 feet, somewhere around 85 knots.
Watch what happens when I just increase my thrust. Just watch what happens here.
I don't have my hands on the controls, but notice the airplane is starting to climb.
So thrust and weight are no longer equal.
As you can see, my wings start creating more lift when we accelerate.
When I increase my thrust, my lift becomes greater than my weight, and the opposite is true when I decelerate.
Okay, now I'm trimmed out for level unaccelerated flight again.
At this point, thrust and drag are equal, but what happens if I increase my lift?
Watch my airspeed as I raise the nose of the aircraft.
I don't fly at 80 knots. I'm at 2000 feet.
Okay?
So watch my airspeed when I raise the nose of the airplane up.
So I'm increasing lift right now. Watch my airspeed.
Yeah, that's right. The airspeed is bleeding off. I made a change.
Before I increased my lift, we were in steady unaccelerated flight.
When I increased my lift, I also increased my induced drag.
And this caused my drag to be stronger than the thrust which slowed down my aircraft.
Understanding these basic principles is probably the most important step to learning how to control an airplane.
And now that you've watched this video, you have an understanding that most pilots don't get in their first ground lesson.
If you want to continue learning how to fly, I recommend starting the playlist where you'll be picking up with lesson two.
And there you can binge watch this series.
When you take a break, you can pick up right where you left off.
Thanks for watching. See ya.
You